
The last decade was probably the most important decade for music for me.  The 90's were definitely my formative years, but for most of it i lacked both disposable income and the immense scope of discovery that the internet has given us.  This decade, i had the money and the means to really stretch my musical legs.  It took time to get the ball rolling, but once it did it caused a veritable avalanche of cd's - a geniune hazard in my bedroom as Michelle will no doubt wearily testify.

It's hard to encompass it all in a nice and easy way, especially as remembering just a years worth of musical discovery is hard, and some acts hit high points with specific albums only to never quite make good on their promise.  So i'm going to cheat a bit.  Maybe, if it will help drum up some responses, you would like to cheat as well? ;)

Honourable mentions : 

Vitalic, Justice, Soulwax/2 Many DJ's : For doing their very best to stop dance music just become a farce of no-talent morons doing covers.

Poison the well : Only just got into this band this year with the absolutely awesome "The Tropic Rot" and have soon become a band that i've hunted down as many albums as possible for and have never been disappointed.  Definitely my band of the last year.

Nine Inch Nails, Faith No More, Pixies, Iron Maiden : Four bands that have offered up some of my musical highlights in terms of live performances.  Meeting Trent and the rest of the band was fantastic, as was seeing Faith No More and The Pixies - two bands who i never believed i would have a chance of seeing, and an afternoon of drinking at Twickenham followed by two hours of metal awesomeness just made Iron Maiden total amazing.

One-hit wonders of the decade : (Five bands who hit a peak they never returned to)

5)  The Rise - Signal to Noise  (Just awesome hardcore/electronica cross-over.  This band got me into Refused, which is never a bad thing, and is definitely an album that i can listen to in one sitting without ever looking for the skip button.)
4)  Mudvayne - LD50 (Just in the last decade - early 2000, but a fantastic album.  Severely overlooked because of comparisons with Slipknot, this albums got much more in terms of creativity and originality and should have been given a much better chance than it was.)
3)  At the drive-in - Relationship of Command (This may seem a little unfair, but this was their glorious swan song, and the only one of their albums released in this decade.)
2)  Bloc Party - Silent Alarm  (Initially i resisted the charms of this band, but i don't know why.  A musical tour-de-force, brimming with great songs and fantastic double guitar riffing, all topped of with some truly great drumming.)
1)  Queens of the stone age - Songs for the deaf  (Definitely the peak of the Queens' career.  A band at the height of it's powers spawning some of best singles of the decade.  With Dave Grohl blowing everyone away with his drumming, Mark Lanegan providing some great extra vocals, and before Nick Oliveri left and a big part of their edge went with him, this was the sound of a group of performers clicking like very few others ever do.)

Bands of the decade : (When trying to pick my best albums out i hit a big problem, i was often having to comapre two albums by the same artists and pick one over the other.  In the end i noticed a pattern, certain bands kept just cropping up time and time again.  I figured that rather than just trying to pick out specific albums, i will just take the easy road and pick out the bands that have, for various reasons, just made this decade so musically memorable to me.)

10) Lamb of God (Albums : Ashes of the wake, Sacrement, Wrath)

Fairly late to the table, but just brimming with metally goodness.  A thorough-bred of riffery and growly vocals.  I picked up Sacrement first, and over time found that i just loved listening to all of it.  Ashes of the wake and Wrath followed on, and all are just a joy to listen to.  One of many metal acts that i've listened to since it's rebirth in my musical horizons, but definitely a high point.

9) Kings of Leon (Albums : Youth and Young Manhood and Aha Shake Heartbreak, Because of the times)

Before they really fell out of favour with me with their commercial album.  (YUCK).  These guys were the embodiement of modern rock'n'roll.  They looked like freakish gonks and rocked like an avalanche.  The first two albums are now sadly sold as "complete-ists" collections, but really were them at their very best. 

8) yourcodenameis:milo (Albums : All roads to a fault, Ignoto, They came from the sun)

Just a great band with their own sound.  Liked the fact that they tried out a few new ideas on each album and certainly knew how to rock more than their mainstream contemparies.

7) TV on the Radio (Albums : Desperate Youth, Blood Thirsty Babes, Return to cookie mountain, Dear Science)

Fantastic vocals make the backbone of this group, a sort of barbershop quartet for the 21st century with each album improving on the previous in terms of ideas and creativity.

6) Les Savy Fav (Albums : Inches, Let's Stay Friends)

A wide variety of styles and sounds packed into both of these albums along with some incredible songs definitely make them deserve a place in this top 10.

5) Yo La Tengo (Albums : And Then Nothing Turned Itself Inside-Out, Summer Sun, I Am Not Afraid of You and I Will Beat Your Ass)

Technically it's a non-00's album of theirs that should be here.  For me, "I can hear the heart beating as one" is one of the best and most accomplished albums i've heard.  Covering a wide variety of styles and genres with little effort but always sounding like it's their speciciality whatever they are playing.  They make beautiful music and were a band that definitely played a big part in broadening my musical horizons.

4) The Paper Chase (Albums : Someday This Could All Be Yours, Vol. 1, Now You Are One of Us, God Bless Your Black Heart)

A horror band, best way to describe them, or certainly discomfort if not horror.  Their lyrics are often creepy, lecherous or just eerie, with a mixture of guitars, strings, piano and samples to back it up.  All chugging along as if they want to suggest that there's something about to jump out from the shadows and grab you.  Simply unique and in my mind unmissable.

3) Mastodon (Albums : Leviathan, Blood Mountain, Crack the Skye)

A massive metal monster of a band that have managed to make prog not such a dirty word any more.  Great riffs, fantastic vocals, and awesome songs.  

2) McLusky / Future of the left (Albums : My Pain and Sadness is More Sad and Painful Than Yours, Mclusky Do Dallas,
The Difference Between Me and You Is That I'm Not on Fire, Mcluskyism / Curses, Last night i saved her from vampires,
Travels with myself and another)

A band i discovered when they first split up - fortunately they parially reformed as the more eclectic Future of the left - McLusky were clever, witty, yet fierce and have made me pick up more lyrics than many others bands due to sheer catchiness.

1) Reuben (Albums : Racecar is racecar backwards, Very Fast Very Dangerous, In cities we trust, We should have gone to University)

A band of the last decade in many ways.  Forming near the beginning of the 00's they sadly split up in '09 but left a musical legacy worth cherishing.  Many great albums with many great songs and little fear of being aggressive in a nerd-rage sort of way.  A common, bittersweet theme to several songs of their being a struggling rock band made their untimely demise all the more heartbreaking.